Deonte Burton is closing on 2,000 points scored in his college career, which he surprisingly decided to extend with a fourth and final season after an extended debate last year. Burton ranks among the top point guards in this draft class in a variety of categories, but is completely off the national media's radar and looks to be struggling to move the needle on his draft stock playing for a dysfunctional team that sports a mediocre 12-14 record in the Mountain West Conference. Nevertheless, he shows intriguing potential in a number of areas and might end up being a better pro than many thought coming out of college.
Burton has average size at 6-1, but makes up for that and then some with a strong 190 pound frame, a long 6-6 wingspan, and arguably the best athleticism of any point guard in this class, as he sports a lighting quick first step and extremely impressive leaping ability jumping off two feet.

Burton is the fourth best scoring point guard in our top-100 rankings, making an outstanding 55% of his 2-point attempts (second among DX Top-100 PGs), while getting to the free throw line over seven times per-40 (fifth among DX Top-100 PGs), and sporting the lowest turnover rate among any DX Top-100 ranked point guard.

Burton is deadly in the three areas NBA teams like to see point guard prospects excel the most at the collegiate level—being highly efficient in the pick and roll, isolation, and transition situations. His terrific first step, strong frame, and extreme aggressiveness allow him to make a living driving to the basket, finishing around the rim and getting to the free throw line, despite playing in what appears to be a highly dysfunctional team situation in terms of system or structure, with seemingly very little talent alongside him. He makes an outrageous 66% of his field goal attempts around the basket in the half-court, second best among top-100 prospects, and gets there at an impressive rate as well.

On paper, Burton is a very streaky shooter, making just 32% of his 3-point attempts on the season after hitting 30% as a junior. Despite his low percentages and unconventional mechanics, digging deeper, we find that he's actually capable of making shots with the best of them, with both his feet set and off the dribble. His 1.6 made 3-pointers per game ranks fourth among point guards in this class—he simply takes far too many outside looks, which may be partially due to the situation he's in.

Burton never leaves the floor for Nevada, he plays more minutes per game than any player in our top-100 prospects ranking, and is responsible for 28% of his team's scoring, more than any point guard in this class.

With that said, it's difficult to ignore the fact that Burton's team has won less than half their games this season, only Olivier Hanlan's Boston College squad can say the same among Top-100 college prospects, and his poor shot-selection and decision making are no small culprits in that. He doesn't do a great job of reading defenses or getting teammates involved, often dribbling with his head down, and badly overestimates his outside shooting ability, jacking up ill-advised looks early in the shot-clock. Burton is much more of a scorer than he is a natural facilitator, something that isn't the end of the world in today's NBA, but is still something he'll have to work on playing alongside better talent in the future. He's never made the NCAA Tournament and only went to the NIT once (in 2012) in his career, which looks unlikely to change this season. The fact that he turns 23 in July also won't help him when he's stacked up against the other top point guard prospects in this draft, as he's 2-3 years older than most of them.
While Nevada ranks just 211th among all college basketball teams in defensive efficiency this season according to KenPom, Burton appears to have good tools on this end of the floor with his solid wingspan, strength and athleticism. His quickness and explosiveness can be easily noted with the way he gets in the passing lanes and the fact that he ranks second among DX Top-100 PGs in blocks, and he should be able to more than hold his own at the pro level once he's not forced to play nearly 40 minutes a game and carry his team offensively.

Matchups against the likes of San Diego State, UCLA, Cal, Missouri, New Mexico, UNLV and others have given us ample opportunity to evaluate Burton's strengths and weaknesses as a prospect, which we've done in the following video scouting report, courtesy of Mike Schmitz.

The 2012 WAC Player of the Year, Deonte Burton entered his junior season as one of the best point guard prospects outside of the BCS conferences. Now in the Mountain West Conference, Burton has been tasked with leading the Nevada Wolf Pack through one of the deepest and toughest conferences in college basketball, and without very much help alongside him after the departures of seniors Dario Hunt and Olek Czyz.

In last place at 3-11 in the MWC (12-16 overall), Nevada has struggled mightily this season and Burton has not been the panacea that fans may have hoped given his breakthrough sophomore season. That being said, he has been very good overall, seeing both his scoring and efficiency rise, even though that hasn't contributed to many wins thus far. As it appears he is legitimately considering entering the 2013 NBA Draft, the question on scouts minds' is whether or not he has what it takes to play point guard in the NBA.

Standing 6'1 in shoes with a strong frame and a 6'6 wingspan, Burton has only average size for the point guard position in the NBA. With that said, he is a very good athlete, possessing both excellent quickness in the open floor and impressive explosiveness around the basket. Combined with his tough and relentless style of play, his athleticism and strength allow him to compensate somewhat for his lack of ideal size.

More of a scoring lead guard than a pure point, Burton is responsible for nearly 25% of Nevada's points, averaging 18.8 points per 40 minutes pace adjusted – while posting career high shooting efficiency numbers. A look inside of the statistics reveals that he has a very diverse scoring arsenal, finding 25.7% of his offense in transition, 23.5% in isolation, 18.7% out of the pick-and-roll, and 12.1% while spotting up.

Burton is at his best when he's slashing to the basket, where he can either go strong to the rim or pull up for a floater. His outstanding first step is difficult for opponents to stay in front of, as he's extremely aggressive looking to attack off the dribble, utilizing his strong upper body to create space and initiate contact at the rim, often drawing plenty of fouls in the process. Few college guards are capable of getting all the way to the basket as frequently and effectively as Burton is, which is a highly coveted attribute.

While Burton previously struggled to convert around the rim earlier in his career, he is making a strong 51% of his half-court attempts at the rim as a junior, and a career-high 51% overall from 2-point range. Though right handed, he shows a tendency to drive left, but is adept at finishing with either hand. Furthermore, he gets to the line at an excellent rate, averaging a stellar 8.2 free throw attempts per 40 minutes pace adjusted, ranking as one of the most prolific free throw drawers in our top-100.

While Burton has developed into an excellent driver, he has regressed as a shooter, making less than 30% of his overall jump shots. His mechanics are slightly unorthodox, but his release is both consistent and quick, and he puts a lot of arc on his shot. Burton's low percentages appear to be more a product of poor shot-selection than an issue with his technique, as he regularly shows the ability to make shots with his feet set and off the dribble.

With that said, too often Burton will bring the ball up the floor and pull up for a 3-pointer before any of his teammates have even gotten a touch. He tends to overestimate his perimeter shooting ability, setting for long off the dribble jumpers with a hand in his face a few times every game.

The question is whether Burton can play point guard at the next level. On film, it is clear that Burton does not have the most talented supporting cast, and his career-high 21.7% of Nevada's overall possessions speaks to just how large of a role he is forced to shoulder on the offensive end. Furthermore, his team does not appear to be very disciplined or structured on the offensive end, as they quickly and easily resort to an isolation-heavy style of half-court basketball, with Burton dribbling the air out of the ball and everyone else standing around and watching.

Burton will need to improve his court vision and decision making ability, as he doesn't do a great job of reading defenses at this stage of his career and too often will dribble with his head down and try to just barrel his way into the lane.

Because he is Nevada's top shot creator, scorer, and facilitator, Burton is clearly a shoot-first guard at this stage, but he shows glimpses of his passing ability, particularly in transition, but also in half court sets where he finds his man off of the dribble. Furthermore, he shows proficiency operating out of the pick-and-roll as both a passer and as a scorer. While it is difficult to evaluate his abilities as a point guard in this setting and despite his career low assist numbers, he has made legitimate strides in this area and is averaging a career low 0.15 turnovers per possession.

Not a whole lot has changed on the defensive end for Burton since we wrote about him in the pre-season. He still shows very good lateral quickness, quick hands, and energy, which allows him to stay in front of guards at the collegiate level and the strength to stay with his man through screens. As was the case last year, as well; Nevada's undisciplined defense and his average size make it difficult to evaluate him, but his effort and athleticism should allow him to be an above average one-on-one defender at the next level with better coaching and added experience.

Burton provides an intriguing combination of athleticism and scoring ability for a scoring point guard. Though his average size and decision making skills are legitimate areas of concern when projecting him at the next level, the strengths he shows as a shot-creator will earn him plenty of looks whenever he decides to enter the draft.

Coming off a surprising freshman season, Deonte Burton may not have made a huge statistical leap as a prospect, but he showed enough incremental improvement in his game to build off of his strong freshman campaign.

While Burton has played primarily the point guard position for the Wolf Pack, he is not yet what you would call a true lead guard, not showing great court vision or an overall feel for controlling the tempo of a game. Nevada returned a veteran squad last season, with Olek Czyz and Dario Hunt bringing significant and athleticism to the frontcourt positions, but the team looked disorganized and struggled to win most of their big games, eventually being knocked out in the semifinals of the WAC conference tournament. Now having moved to the Mountain West Conference, Burton will face better competition on a nightly basis but will have to improve even more if he's to help his team reach the NCAA tournament.

Burton's main asset at this point is still his scoring, where he brings a diversified attack from the lead guard position. His most identifiable trait is his ability to shoot off the dribble, which opens up the rest of his game. While Burton has a long release with a lot of extra leg motion, he gets good elevation and does a tremendous job making shots off the dribble and with a hand in his face, with incredible concentration and touch allowing him to make many shots with a high degree of difficulty.

This manifests itself the most off the pick and rolls, where he is able to use the space from the pick to get up a quality look with ease. The attention defenders have to give Burton as a shooter off the pick opens up his dribble drive game. Burton has a good first step, and once he gets into the lane has surprising explosiveness around the rim and a strong upper body. While Burton has only average touch, and doesn't always have the size and strength to finish his drives, he does a very good job of drawing contact in the paint, and his 7.2 free throw attempts per 40 minutes pace adjusted is a top 10 mark in our database for point guard prospects.

Despite being a right handed player, Burton prefers to drive to his left, something which at times appears to catch his defenders by surprise. That being said, he is not yet as comfortable finishing with his left hand as he is with his right, and improving upon this facet of his game could help improve his proficiency in finishing inside and allow him to take advantage of his ability to drive left even more.

Burton has a very prolific in-between game, as he took twice as many pull-up jumpers as spot-ups last season and made 36%of those attempts. With that said, he doesn't always get great balance on his pull-up jumpers and his shot-selection can leave something to be desired at times (to put it mildly perhaps), but he did rank as one of the most efficient isolation threats in college basketball last season, which is very intriguing considering the premium NBA decision makers put on shot-creation ability. As his decision making improves, his shot-making ability in the mid-range area could be honed into a very valuable skill.

As a ball-handler, Burton does a good job of keeping his dribble low and maintains good control of the ball. He has a solid crossover dribble and does a good job of changing speeds, displaying excellent timing and instincts for knowing when to attack his defender when he's at his most unbalanced, and thus doing a very good job of creating space for himself to operate. This helps him get into the lane on a fairly regular basis, and as mentioned allows him to get to the free throw line at a very high rate.

Burton's playmaking skills are still very much a work in progress, as his shot-selection and decision making can be very poor at times and he tends to freeze out his teammates when things aren't going well. Scouts will want to see better leadership from him as a junior.

On the defensive side of the ball, Burton has solid size to defend the point guard position at 6'1" with a very long wingspan at 6'6" and has a strong upper body that looks like it could add a bit more muscle. He gets himself in a fairly good stance and does a fair job of fighting through pick and rolls, but like most of his Nevada team, doesn't show great fundamentals or awareness keeping opponents out of the lane. He tends to lose his focus easily and gets beaten off the dribble by opponents. His size may prevent him from being an impact defender at the next level, but if he works hard at it he should be able to work himself into at least an average defender with better coaching.

With Nevada having lost Olek Czyz and Dario Hunt to graduation, Deonte Burton will see his first major role change at the collegiate level. With Nevada not having Czyz and Hunt to anchor the frontcourt, Nevada will be more reliant on Burton to get good looks for his teammates. While Burton is a solid collegiate scorer, showing development as a point guard would help his draft stock considerably if he is able to take advantage of his new role.

A largely unheralded recruit coming out of Centennial HS in Compton, Deonte Burton had a tremendous freshman year at Nevada, garnering WAC Freshman of the Year honors. He did not stand out in any one particular area, but made an immediate impact for the Wolfpack, and will be a key part of the success of what will be one of the more talented teams Nevada has had in some time as a sophomore. Considering what he was able to accomplish as a true freshman, Burton is a prospect worth keeping an eye on as he looks to take a step forward in his sophomore year.

Athletically, Burton fits the profile of a NBA point guard fairly well. He isn't overwhelmingly quick or explosive, but he has a nice first step, a frame that still has potential for growth, and will surprise defenders with his ability to rise up and play above the rim when he jumps off of two feet. Like many freshmen, he could stand to slow down and become a bit more discerning with the way he utilizes his athleticism as he gets a bit out of control at times, especially in traffic.

As a scorer, Burton makes an impact on a number of levels. He can score on the pick and roll thanks to his ability to turn the corner and finish at the rim, will knock down spot-up shots from beyond the arc with consistency, and shows the ability to create separation for pull-up jump shots seamlessly from the midrange in one-on-one situations.

Though his shot selection is less than ideal and he often shoots the ball on the way down when defended, Burton takes and makes a lot of difficult jump shots. He only knocks down 30% of his pull-up jump shots according to Synergy Sports Technology, but his 45% shooting with a hand in his face off the catch is nothing short of impressive. Clearly there's a bit of a gap in his efficiency from the perimeter, and balancing his spot-up and midrange shot selection is a sticking point in Burton's offensive development moving forward.

In some ways, something similar can be said regarding Burton's slashing ability. He does a tremendous job drawing contact and getting to the line, but his propensity to play too fast when attacking the paint leads to some erratic shots around the rim and when pushing the ball in transition. Though he doesn't settle for many floaters, Burton needs to learn to improve his decision-making and play at different speeds to maximize his efficiency in the paint.

As a point guard, Burton does a nice job making the easy plays to set up his teammates when he sees an opportunity, but has plenty of room to grow and the tools to improve. Considering his shot selection, Burton could be deemed a tweener at this point, but he juggled his role as point guard and scorer fairly well for a freshman and if he begins to be a bit less aggressive with his jump shot and plays more under control off the dribble and with pace in transition, his ability to distort defenses and push the tempo could help him emerge as a quality playmaker.

Defensively, Burton plays with good energy. He shows tremendous recovery speed when closing out shooters, but is a bit overaggressive at times, allows slower players to get to the rim in one-on-one situations, and doesn't always fight aggressively over screens. Still, he shows solid intensity and with time and coaching could become a capable defender thanks to his solid lateral quickness.

Deonte Burton may have his shortcomings as a prospect at this time, but there are few players who are able to come into the college game and have an immediate impact akin to the one he had last season. Considering Nevada returns much of its core this season, Burton's role may not radically change this season, but if he makes some incremental improvements, considering the amount of time he has to develop, he could become one of the more intriguing mid-major guard prospects in the west in time.

Former Nevada Wolf Pack basketball coach Sonny Allen walked around Reno Events Center during the NBA Development League Showcase this week like a magnet.

Everywhere he went, scouts were attracted.

Allen, who coached Nevada from 1980-87, is a well-respected basketball mind and while scouts were just checking in with an old friend, Allen wasn’t opposed to bragging up Wolf Pack star Deonte Burton.

“Scouts ask me about him all the time,” Allen said. “I’ve seen him for four years and I’ve seen him play 30 great games. He can play in the NBA. He can be a backup guard, a combination 1 and 2. He can play in the NBA, and I’ve told a bunch of scouts that. He has good character, is a great athlete and can play.”

With scouts from every team in attendance at the annual D-League Showcase, I decided to ask some about the stock of Burton, who could have entered the draft last year but returned for his senior year.

The feedback was generally good, with most NBA executives and scouts having a balanced but positive outlook on Burton’s pro potential.
“He’s definitely on our radar,” one NBA executive said on the condition of anonymity because team rules prohibit discussion on college prospects. “Good player. Very good. The kid can play in the league.”

With the 2014 NBA draft being one of the deepest in history, the consensus among scouts was that Burton would be selected in June’s draft but he wouldn’t get the guaranteed money in the first round.

“I’d be surprised if his name didn’t get called in the second round, but I’d be just as surprised if he was a first-round pick as of today,” one scout said on the condition of anonymity, citing team rules.

The scout said Burton’s decision to return to school was likely a good decision since he wasn’t a guaranteed first-round draft pick last season. This year’s draft is deep overall, but it lacks at the point guard position, which will help Burton. Still, the scout doesn’t see Burton as a first-round pick.

“For the lack of a better term, it’s his overall level,” the scout said. “He doesn’t do anything so well that he’s at the same level as the top four or five point guard names in this draft. Also, he hasn’t had very much team success. Can you raise the level of your team and your teammates? If you’re clearly an NBA talent that tends to happen when you’re in a less-NBA-talented conference like the Mountain West.”

The Wolf Pack has posted a 61-53 record, with zero NCAA Tournament appearances, during Burton’s three-plus years at Nevada. A run toward a MWC title or into the NCAA Tournament could help Burton’s stock. Playing in his favor is his playmaking ability, ability to finish at the rim and his 6-foot-6 wing span.

“The kid is long as hell,” the scout said. “He’s got OK size (at 6-1), but his length makes him play a lot bigger. He’s a good vertical athlete. Streaky shooter, decent overall athlete, smart kid. He has plusses.”

Another scout, also speaking on condition of anonymity, said Burton’s ability to hit key shots late in the game is a draw as is his ability to lead a team from the point guard position.

“He’s got a lot of potential,” the scout said. “He’s a heady player. He’s a really good leader. He’s that quarterback. He’s a very competitive guy, and so there’s a lot to like about him. He has a lot of skills and a lot of tools that a lot of scouts are obviously going to pay very close attention to.”

Prior to Nevada’s game against UNLV on Wednesday, Rebels coach Dave Rice said Burton was one of the best players in the Mountain West and a bona fide NBA player.

“I’m surprised he’s still in college,” Rice told the Las Vegas Review-Journal. “I thought he would leave after last year. That’s the respect I have for him. He’s an NBA player, no doubt.”

Burton lived up to the billing, putting on a 2-hour commercial for why he could succeed in the NBA. The 22-year-old tallied 29 points, five rebounds and three assists in 32 minutes as Nevada beat its rival, 74-71. This year, Burton has posted career bests in points per game (22.3) and field-goal percentage (47.2).

One thing potentially playing in Burton’s favor is his style of play.

“He’s more suited for the pros than for college because of the fast tempo of the game,” Allen said.

One addition concern about Burton, scout said, is whether he’s a point guard at the next level. He’s the size of point guard, but is more of a score-first kind of player, which isn’t necessarily a huge red flag.

“He might not be a true point guard, but he’s a true basketball player,” Allen said. “He has great athletic skills. I probably wouldn’t take him as a first-round pick, but there are a lot of guys like him who make a good backup and play in the league for a long time. He’d be a great second-round pick.”

ONE SCOUT’S TAKE

Here’s the report on Nevada’s Deonte Burton from one NBA scout who has seen him play several times.

Scout’s take: “He’s a solid second rounder. He hasn’t done enough to improve himself to become a first rounder so far. Obviously, he is trying to show that he’s more of a pass-first point guard. I would tell him to play toward his strength and try and score the basketball. That’s not a terrible thing. There are plenty of guys who do that in the NBA. He improved his body drastically last summer. Obviously he’s a streaky shooter from deep. Has a nice feel for the game. Surprising vertical athlete. Overall, just an OK athlete. Kind of herky-jerkies his way to the paint. He can make plays. I’d be surprised if his name didn’t get called in the second round, but I’d be just as surprised if he was a first-round pick as of today.”
A powerful and quick lead guard who can score the ball.

Pros
A well built, strong and athletic prospect. Very explosive into the lane and has a knack for getting to the rim. Gets to the foul line often and puts a ton of pressure on defenders with his creative handle and quick first step.

Is a very active defender who plays the passing lanes well and has the quickness to guard 90 feet and the strength to guard bigger players. Plays with passion and energy.

Cons
More of a scoring guard in a point guard's body.

Only an average free throw shooter and not very accurate from long range.

Needs to become a true set-up man and get better at running sets.

Projection: late first or second round pick in the 2014 NBA Draft

Strengths:

Athletic
Quick First Step
Pure Point Guard
Explosive Finisher
Quality Shooter
Weaknesses:

General Quickness and Speed
Inconsistent Shooter
Limited Defensively

When Deonte Burton came to Nevada, he had never played the point guard position before. Burton was more of a small shooting guard who loved to shoot the ball, but he didn't have the selfish label. Late in the recruiting process, UCLA ended up trying to get him, but Burton remained loyal to Nevada who had been interested from the beginning. Nevada has turned out to be a lot better situation for him, not only allowing him to play his freshman year, but he had the opportunity to learn how to play point guard on the fly.

Armon Johnson ended up declaring for the NBA draft, leaving a vacant opening at the point guard position. Burton was asked to fill the job and did so admirably. He had a great freshman season, being named the WAC's freshman of the year. As an undersized scoring guard, his transition and success right away at the point guard position drew the attention of NBA scouts.

Now, Burton hasn't been an overnight success story running the point guard. With Nevada's offense, he hasn't been asked to be much of a playmaker yet. Nevada had Dario Hunt, Olek Cyzy, and Malik Story all capable of creating their own shots. Burton was more in charge of bringing the ball up the court and getting his team into the offense. Coach David Carter didn't place a ton of pressure on him. For the most part, Burton was still asked to do what he does best - score.

Burton was known as a volume shooter in high school and you can still see the shooting guard in him when he plays. Too many times Burton brings the ball up and fires a deep 3-pt shot right away. Burton gets excellent lift on his jumper, allowing him to shoot over the bigger defenders he saw as a SG, but has a habit of shooting on his way down. His long release and extended movement from his legs creates a lot of moving parts, but there is a large enough sample size to call Burton a good shooter. He shot 35.5% from 3 his freshman year and upped his percentage to 37% this past season while taking over 5 threes per 40 minutes. He also improved his FT% by 5%, shooting a respective 80% in his sophomore year. Something that is surprising is that Burton is a very good shooter under pressure. Burton takes plenty of questionable shots that are contested, but he has apparently adjusted to shooting with a hand in his face fairly well.

Burton's no fear attitude and confidence in his jumper makes him the scorer he is right now. His three point shot sets up the rest of his offense, as the defense knows that he will pop a jumper at any time - from anywhere on the court. Burton takes advantage of this, showing a nice little ball fake and stutter step, using it to get into the lane. Burton has the strong body and explosiveness to do damage inside, but at this moment he is still a work in progress.

Burton is a very solidily put together player with natural athletic ability. He is on the small end and lacks the elite athleticism to render that point obsolete. Still, he is a good enough athlete that he can survive. He just needs to improve his mid-range game. If I was to give Burton any advice, Id recommend him model his game after former Hofstra star, Charles Jenkins, who is now in the NBA.

Right now, Burton has no in-between game. He take it hard into the lane and has to settle for difficult shots through contact. Burton can finish "and-one" plays at the rim as he has tons of explosion packed into his frame, but awkward shots from the foul line while absorbing contact should be avoided. Burton has a decent crossover and shows some hesitation moves, but has been unable to put it all together to form a mid-range game. Part of the problem does fall on his shooting form. Burton needs to get his feet set in order to get a good shot off and his current form makes it hard to do off the dribble in the paint. Off the dribble in transition is a little different as Burton is able to slow up and set his feet with a crossover to gain space. But in traffic, that is not feasible.

Burton is a steady ball handler, staying low to the ground and protecting the body with his mature frame. He has a propensity to drive the ball to the left, even though he is right handed. He seems to get more burst with his left hand. If Burton continues to do this, he needs to work on finishing with his left hand as well. For a guy that goes to the left as often as he does, he costs himself some baskets trying to finish with his right hand.

As a point guard, Burton is still a work in progress. Burton was not aggressive about bringing the ball up the court each time and being a leader. He did play on a veteran team, but I would have liked to see him bring the ball up more. Too many times the opposition covered Burton on the in-bounds and Burton made no effort to come back for the ball. He just ran up the court and assumed the role of shooting guard. When Burton does bring it up, he will either look to score in transition right away or initiate the offense at the top of the key by simply passing it off to somebody else. Rarely does Burton create much for his teammates, but Nevada's offense wasn't the best for that.

Burton would get chances on the pick and roll where he shows the ability to turn the corner. He also showed the ability to dribble himself into double teams and struggled to find an open teammate when being crowded by taller defenders. Burton needs to make quicker decision off the pick and roll due to his size and also needs to see the court better. Burton has to keep his head up and find open teammates. Right now, Burton makes the easy passes but can't see secondary and tertiary options.

Burton does take a lot of questionable shots, but overall he is a pretty unselfish player. Burton is a very streaky scorer who will go off for 8 points in a row and then fade into the background for the rest of the half. He can force some jumpshots, but they are shots he can make. When it comes to driving, Burton has improved since his freshman year in terms of playing more under control.

Defensively,  Burton shows the strength and energy to become a decent defender. He has solid length that should make him adequate in terms of point guards, perhaps even ideal considering his body type. Burton is fundamentally sound, staying low to the ground and always making sure to have his hands up. His lateral quickness leaves something to be desired, but since his strength is not an issue, Burton doesnt have to worry about losing anymore quickness in order to add weight. Burton hasn't impressed with his ability to rebound, but Nevada did employ a fair amountof zone defense in the games I watched. His quickness won't ever allow him to be a big playmaker defensively, but he can be a solid defender who stays in his lane.

To me, Burton has a long way to go as a prospect. He is being looked at as a potential second rounder this year, but he has a lot to improve upon to get there. With Cyzy and Hunt gone, the Nevada offense will become more perimeter oriented and Burton will finally be asked to be a playmaker. That is a good thing. The problem is Burton at the moment is still an undersize combo guard (tweener) without elite athleticism, point guard skills, feel for the game, or elite scoring ability. He is a solid player, but his transition to point guard has been overstated. He has been more of a point guard by title up to this point. This year we will see him pushed farther out of his comfort zone which can only be a good thing for him. He looks like an undrafted guy at the moment with his ceiling being a second rounder.
There’s a chance, Mr. or Mrs. Diehard college hoops fan, that you don’t know who Deonte Burton is. No, we aren’t talking about the Marquette swingman (although that might also be a conversation worth having, after he authored this late entry for the dunk of 2013). The Deonte Burton you need to know had produced a trio of productive individual campaigns before this 2013-14 season, but here in his final go-around, both the volume and efficiency of that production has exploded. Finding a national spotlight can be difficult when you are starring on a mediocre team in a self-proclaimed “little city” (even if it may be the “biggest little city in the world”), but it’s time for folks outside of Reno to start taking note of Nevada’s explosive senior. And if the surprising Wolfpack’s newfound winning ways somehow manage to keep up? There will be no choice but to appreciate the player at the center of the surge.
After a 74-71 victory over UNLV in Las Vegas on Wednesday night, Nevada is suddenly alone atop the Mountain West at 3-0. The quick start marks a drastic reversal of fortune for a team that won just three conference games all of last season, and entered 2014 with an entirely underwhelming 5-8 overall record. Wins over San Jose State (on the road) and Wyoming set the stage for the Wolfpack’s victory in the battle for the Silver State, but this latest triumph was far from guaranteed early. UNLV built an 11-point lead late in the first half, but in those critical pre-intermission minutes when second-half momentum is always on the line, Burton snatched all that impetus the Rebels had previously held. In the span of 80 seconds, three consecutive contested, step-back Burton jumpers found the bottom of the net, and the Wolfpack headed to the locker room down just two. It was as acute a pivot point in momentum as you will find, and it propelled Nevada to an 11-0 run out of the locker room. This spurt created some permanent separation, as the UNLV deficit wouldn’t shrink to below six again until the meaningless final seconds.
UNLV head man Dave Rice later said that he thought those three Burton buckets “were really the difference in the game.” Hard to disagree with the contention, but Burton’s excellence went far beyond that stretch. He finished the night with 29 points (12-of-20 from the field), five rebounds, and three assists (against no turnovers), but it was his seismic, arena-clearing throw-down that later had even SportsCenter paying homage.
The explosiveness alone may make Burton a must-watch, but the diminutive (he’s listed at 6’1”) lead guard’s skill package goes well beyond his hops. Burton’s assist percentage has been above 20 percent in all four of his collegiate campaigns (and in the top-200 nationally, until this season), and despite relatively pedestrian three-point percentages this season and last (33% and 30%, respectively), his quick-release stroke belies that of a significantly better shooter (he also shot above 35 percent from deep in each of his first two years in Reno). Throw in some intangibles for good measure – Burton is a clear leader incapable of hiding his fire and passion on the floor (in the good way) – and it’s no shock that the senior is popping up on mock draft boards everywhere: NBAdraft.net currently has Burton going #32 overall in its 2014 mock draft. With every dazzling performance, his future potential is becoming just as apparent as the current production. For the season, Burton has averaged 22.3 points, 3.7 assists, and 1.6 steals per contest.
The Nevada schedule now begins to toughen up, as top-100 outfits Utah State and Boise State will be arriving in Reno over the course of the next week. Without aspiring to play the role of the grim reaper here, I should submit that it’s entirely possible that we witnessed the high-water mark of this Wolfpack season on Wednesday night. Anyone who took in the Burton show at Thomas & Mack surely joins me in hoping Nevada can maintain some relevance moving forward, but there have to be doubts about the Wolfpack’s supporting cast, and the rough-and-tumble Mountain West takes few prisoners. But no matter the final destination of this Nevada season, official notice has been served: Reno is home to one of the finest players in all of college hoops. In fact, you might even call Deonte Burton the biggest little man in college basketball.
I believe I saw a bona fide NBA player lighting it up in Taco Bell Arena in Boise on Wednesday night.

Sorry Boise State fans, the player wasn’t on your squad and he is the primary reason why a crowd of 6,892 went home unhappy as Nevada posted an 83-81 double-overtime victory.

Deonte Burton is his name and scoring ability, playmaking and highlight-reel dunks are part of his game.

Burton scored eight of his 25 points in the second overtime as the Wolf Pack prevented the Broncos from reaching the 20-win mark. (see stellar game story here – http://bigstory.ap.org/article/nevada-over-boise-state-83-81-2ot)

Burton is listed at 6-1 but certainly plays a lot bigger than that height. He shushed the entire arena with his mammoth dunk, which I see has made its way to YouTube (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ehJYxwJ2MKk) and was also named the top play of the day on ESPN’s SportsCenter.

The senior averages 19.9 points and also leads Nevada in assists and steals. But it is more than the numbers that impress you.

He looks like an NBA player. As well as plays like one.

A lot of college players rack up stats but there’s a major difference in putting up big numbers in college and having the ability to play in the NBA.

Burton is enough of a playmaker to play in the NBA. He’s enough of a shooter. He certainly stacks up as an athlete. He appears to have the competitiveness that you need to even get a sniff of playing in the league.

Since I was a college basketball beat writer for 13 seasons – and have covered more than 60 games the past four-plus years while being fortunate enough to have a better job than newspaper life – I learned long ago to put very little stock in NBA mock drafts that are produced in February and March.

But I will predict this now – Deonte Burton’s name will be called in the 2014 NBA Draft. Not sure when as of yet, put possibly in the latter stages of the first round.

You see, I know an NBA player when I see one. And I saw one Wednesday night.
Deonte Burton is closing on 2,000 points scored in his college career, which he surprisingly decided to extend with a fourth and final season after an extended debate last year. Burton ranks among the top point guards in this draft class in a variety of categories, but is completely off the national media's radar and looks to be struggling to move the needle on his draft stock playing for a dysfunctional team that sports a mediocre 12-14 record in the Mountain West Conference. Nevertheless, he shows intriguing potential in a number of areas and might end up being a better pro than many thought coming out of college.

Burton has average size at 6-1, but makes up for that and then some with a strong 190 pound frame, a long 6-6 wingspan, and arguably the best athleticism of any point guard in this class, as he sports a lighting quick first step and extremely impressive leaping ability jumping off two feet.

Burton is the fourth best scoring point guard in our top-100 rankings, making an outstanding 55% of his 2-point attempts (second among DX Top-100 PGs), while getting to the free throw line over seven times per-40 (fifth among DX Top-100 PGs), and sporting the lowest turnover rate among any DX Top-100 ranked point guard.

Burton is deadly in the three areas NBA teams like to see point guard prospects excel the most at the collegiate level—being highly efficient in the pick and roll, isolation, and transition situations. His terrific first step, strong frame, and extreme aggressiveness allow him to make a living driving to the basket, finishing around the rim and getting to the free throw line, despite playing in what appears to be a highly dysfunctional team situation in terms of system or structure, with seemingly very little talent alongside him. He makes an outrageous 66% of his field goal attempts around the basket in the half-court, second best among top-100 prospects, and gets there at an impressive rate as well.

On paper, Burton is a very streaky shooter, making just 32% of his 3-point attempts on the season after hitting 30% as a junior. Despite his low percentages and unconventional mechanics, digging deeper, we find that he's actually capable of making shots with the best of them, with both his feet set and off the dribble. His 1.6 made 3-pointers per game ranks fourth among point guards in this class—he simply takes far too many outside looks, which may be partially due to the situation he's in.

Burton never leaves the floor for Nevada, he plays more minutes per game than any player in our top-100 prospects ranking, and is responsible for 28% of his team's scoring, more than any point guard in this class.

With that said, it's difficult to ignore the fact that Burton's team has won less than half their games this season, only Olivier Hanlan's Boston College squad can say the same among Top-100 college prospects, and his poor shot-selection and decision making are no small culprits in that. He doesn't do a great job of reading defenses or getting teammates involved, often dribbling with his head down, and badly overestimates his outside shooting ability, jacking up ill-advised looks early in the shot-clock. Burton is much more of a scorer than he is a natural facilitator, something that isn't the end of the world in today's NBA, but is still something he'll have to work on playing alongside better talent in the future. He's never made the NCAA Tournament and only went to the NIT once (in 2012) in his career, which looks unlikely to change this season. The fact that he turns 23 in July also won't help him when he's stacked up against the other top point guard prospects in this draft, as he's 2-3 years older than most of them.

While Nevada ranks just 211th among all college basketball teams in defensive efficiency this season according to KenPom, Burton appears to have good tools on this end of the floor with his solid wingspan, strength and athleticism. His quickness and explosiveness can be easily noted with the way he gets in the passing lanes and the fact that he ranks second among DX Top-100 PGs in blocks, and he should be able to more than hold his own at the pro level once he's not forced to play nearly 40 minutes a game and carry his team offensively.

Matchups against the likes of San Diego State, UCLA, Cal, Missouri, New Mexico, UNLV and others have given us ample opportunity to evaluate Burton's strengths and weaknesses as a prospect, which we've done in the following video scouting report, courtesy of Mike Schmitz.

On a sunny playground in the City of Angels is where Deonte Burton first picked up a basketball. Burton and his brothers, along with their dad, would go down the park and play some hoops. Deonte was too young to join their games then, he was only five years old. But he would watch, and knew that he wanted to be on the court with them.

"Watching them, I always thought that maybe I could play this game," he said. "Obviously I would have needed to get a little taller."

He didn't just watch his brothers, he studied them and their moves. He tried to recreate their moves later on his own. He didn't just emulate his brothers, he also watched all sorts of NBA players. From forwards to point guards, to the occasional center, Burton watched them all. But there was always one star in particular he watched. As a Los Angeles native, Burton was all about Showtime, the Los Angeles Lakers. It was the dominance by the purple and gold, and the young gun known as Kobe Bryant. 

"At the time he had his afro or whatever," he said. "But I always loved Kobe, I always watched Kobe."

He put in the work, and eventually it paid off. It was age 13 that Burton was finally able to beat his older brothers, but that wasn't enough. He had to take on the big dog, the man of the house. He would play against his dad, and try as he may, he never could get past his old man. That was, until one day.

"Right about then, that's when I started being advanced for my age, skill wise," he said. "I was tall and strong for 13, at about 5 feet 11 inches. I played my dad and I almost dunked on him. I didn't quite do it, but I ended up beating him. I never had until then, and that's when I knew this could be serious."

With his skills progressing at the rate they were, it was a lock for Burton to make his high school team. At times, it was clear that Burton was often the best player on the court. Even his coach knew that.

"We didn't really have a big guy, so I had to do a lot for us," he said. "Coach told me I had to rebound for us and make plays for other guys when I got double teamed, and just score the ball."

As a senior, Burton averaged 21 points a game, to go along with 6 rebounds and 5 assists. Those totals led him to be named the regional John R. Wooden High School Player of the Year, and the CIF Southern California Division III Player of the Year. After his high school career was finished, he had totaled over 2,000 points.

Burton had his choices among colleges, including some big-name schools such as UCLA, Cincinnati, and Marquette. Ultimately, Burton did what he thought was best for himself, and found a home to settle in at Nevada. 

"They (Nevada) always showed they were interested in me," he said. "There were some other big name schools, but I didn't think that they were as serious as Nevada. They (Nevada) just hung in there and showed that they were faithful and wanted me more."

Burton gave the Wolf Pack what they were hoping for after they recruited him for so long. He made an immediate impact as a freshman, as he started all 32 games in his freshman season en route to being named the Western Athletic Conference Freshman of the Year. He is only the fourth Wolf Pack player to earn the honor. He was second on the team in scoring for the season with 13.7 points per game, and topped the Pack during WAC play with 15.8 per game. It all came as a learning experience for Burton.

"I had never thought that I would come into college and get any award," he said. "Adjusting to the game was pretty hard, but if you work hard at something you love then you'll get there."

But it wasn't good enough for Burton. To him, the stats didn't mean anything without the wins to back them up.

"It was fun, but we didn't win that much and it was kind of disappointing."

That freshman campaign put Burton on the map for Nevada fans, and the expectations for Burton's sophomore season were beginning to rise. Burton rose with the challenge during his sophomore season, helping lead the team to the WAC Championship in Nevada's final year in the conference. Burton led the team in scoring at 14.8 points per game, and totaled 24 double figure scoring games. He had the only 30 point game for a Pack player that season. But the offense wasn't what impressed Deonte the most, as he believed in the old cliche, "Defense wins championships."

"We just focused and keyed in on defense, that's what separated us from teams, no matter what conference we were in," Burton said. "Our defense was phenomenal that year. When you have a squad like we did that year, the presence of Dario (Hunt) inside, the guard play was nice, back then you could hand check a little bit and get physical, that's what wins championships, defense."

The 30-point game came against Washington in Nevada, where he nailed a three-pointer to send a game against Washington to overtime. There, he proceeded to score 8 of the final 10 points for Nevada in the victory.

"The arena was filled and the adrenaline was going, it was a chance for us to get a big win against a good school," Burton said. "The opportunity presented itself, and I like to think of my self as an opportunist when it comes to basketball, so we had to take it."

He was trending on Twitter that night after the game, something Burton did not realize the merit of immediately.

"I got a tweet about it saying I was trending," he said. "I just started the whole Twitter thing and I really didn't know what it meant, but now it's like, oh man I was trending."

<A HREF=


Twitter was proving his stats were not going unnoticed, as he was named the WAC Player of the Year, the first-team All-WAC, and honorable mention AP All-America. Burton continued his roll into his junior year, when he led the Wolf Pack in scoring for the second straight season. He averaged 16.3 per game and notched a game high in points 11 times, tied for a team high. He scored in double figures 26 times, including a career-high stretch of 15 straight games. 

Again, he helped to take down Washington, this time on the road after he scored his season-best 29 points against them that night. Without another PAC-12 opponent that year, Burton again capitalized on the opportunity to secure another big win for Nevada.


"Give them credit, they're a great team and they have a great coach," Burton said. "But it was a PAC-12 school, and we didn't play UCLA that year, so they had to feel the wrath."

With how well he was playing, it was only a matter of time before he got more national attention. He cracked the SportsCenter Top 10 plays, twice in the same week. Burton threw down a nasty dunk at in-state rival UNLV on January 29, 2013 that landed him second, before his block against then #20 New Mexico made it in as No. 10. While that's something most only dream of, Burton knows he is capable of those plays on a daily basis.

"To me it's not a shock," he said. "To say it in a humble way, I should be making those plays. It was definitely fun to see myself on there and we all got enjoyment from it, but those are the plays I should be making."

Coming into this season, Burton has not been overlooked. He was named No. 71 on the top 100 college players in the nation according to Gary Parrish of CBSSports.com, and was No. 21 of the top 30 guards, according to Parrish. Burton said it was nice to see his name among the best in the nation, but wasn't completely satisfied with the ranking.


"I still felt like I should have been higher," he said. "But obviously it comes from winning, and the type of school you're at. But I'm trying to win and move up the rankings, but the most important thing is winning."

Despite the ranking,a he earned a tryout for the 2013 USA Basketball Men's World University Games.

"That was fun, up in Colorado, I got to train up there and see some of the great players and best point guards all around in college basketball, it was a selective group of guys" he said. "Even though they had me playing out of position, playing a 3 guard that I haven't ran since high school, it was kind of different for me. But it was a fun experience and I got a lot from it."


Burton started his 100th game as a member of the Wolf Pack, but he's not quite finished. After beginning the season at 10th on the career scoring at Nevada, he is quickly climbing the list in his final season of college hoops. In the game against Colorado State, Burton became only the third Wolf Pack member to score 1,900 points, joining Nevada alumni Nick Fazekas and Marcelus Kemp. With 1,911 points, Burton is 28 points behind Kemp for second place.

"You know, I was trying to catch Nick (Fazekas) for first, but it's not going to happen, but second is pretty amazing," Buton said about the possibility of finishing his career second on the Nevada scoring list. "It would be so humbling and great to be one of the top players to ever play at Nevada."

The highlights from a stellar college career have helped Burton build a resume that could help him land a spot on an NBA roster via the NBA draft at season's end. He could have left last year, but came back for one final round.

"I had some unfinished business in the Mountain West," he said. "I'm trying to get to the NCAA tournament, and I'm trying to win a MWC tournament championship, something I've never done, so I've got some things I'm trying to accomplish."

Burton does plan on entering the draft after this season is over, whenever that may be. Currently he is focused on the here and now at Nevada, but he did say there was one team that he would love to see himself being drafted by.

"Lakers," he said. "Lakers, Lakers, Lakers. They need a point guard, and I'm just hoping when the time comes they snatch me up. If not, I don't care what team I play for. But it would be pretty cool to play for my hometown team."

It means one big sacrifice for Burton, however.

"I won't be No. 24 anymore, but if I go there (Los Angeles) I could live with it," he said.

But Burton would be more than happy to swap his No. 24 to acquire the one dream he's worked so hard for -- to play for the team he grew up watching on the biggest stage in basketball, in the city where he first learned how to play.